Barry, Thomas, Carol, Brett, and Pablo, welcome all of you to Talk Python to Me.
Thanks, Michael.
Hey, thanks.
It's so good to have you on the show.
Some of you brand new, some of you familiar faces, but nice to have you all together.
You're all on the Python steering council.
It takes a lot of people to replace Guido.
Is that what I'm hearing?
Absolutely.
Not even replaced.
Not even replaced, just parody.
Yeah, exactly.
There you go.
Fantastic.
Well, I'm really looking forward to talking to you all about it,
shine a little bit of a light on what the steering council does,
what you don't do, what your challenges are, and the role, and so on.
But before we do, maybe we can just go around the video version here
and have you all introduce yourselves.
Start at 12 o'clock, Barry.
You've been on the show before with Paul Overt talking about Python 1984.
Was it '94?
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
PyCon nine, the workshop at NIST in 1994. Yeah.
That was the first time I got a chance to meet Guido.
Right on. Yeah. So a quick, quick background though,
for people didn't listen to that episode.
Yeah. So I've been, you know,
working in Python since '94.
been on the steering council since the initial term I guess. I currently work
for LinkedIn and I guess that's all I really need to say. Yeah what kind of
stuff are you doing on LinkedIn? We're doing, I do work with the Python team
over over at LinkedIn. Currently I'm working on an interesting project that's
trying to improve the access to technical documentation to our
developers, which is a kind of a fun project at times. Yeah, I bet it is. That
sounds awesome. Yeah, cool. Thomas, welcome. Thank you. I'm from
Amsterdam in the Netherlands. I've worked on Python since I think 2000. I became a
core developer in 2001, so I've been around for quite a while. Ned Batchelder,
who wrote coverage likes to call me the most famous Python
person you've never heard of because of the things
that I implemented in Python that everyone uses
that nobody realizes I implemented.
But I'm happy being somewhat anonymous.
I work at Google on Python itself,
on how we deploy Python internally.
And I have a lot of fun with very complex technical
solutions that grows Pablo out.
And I'm also on the board of directors
of the Python Software Foundation,
which is a little bit of different work
than the Python Steering Council.
And right now I'm also stepping in for Eva,
who left us, decided to move on last week.
So I'm currently the interim general manager
while we're looking for the new executive director.
- So you have basically four jobs.
You're a busy person.
- Yes.
My dad made a lot of fun of me last week when I told him this.
He has two full-time jobs and he said I do more work than he does.
Sounds like you're busy.
Being from Amsterdam, are you happy the F1 championship is now?
I heard fireworks yesterday but I wasn't actually paying attention because I haven't watched
the Formula One for many, many years.
Right on. Well, it's another thing to celebrate over there.
Carol, welcome.
Thanks, Michael. It's always a pleasure to see you.
Yes, you as well. Happy to have you.
Much better circumstances. I think the last time I was on,
Brett and I were here right after Guido had resigned.
Yeah, to basically explain,
what was that to discuss the possibilities that were being considered for what has
become the steering council? Absolutely. So we're in a great place now, I think. I've
been at the steering council since the start, and this was my last term. Right now I'm not
running for re-election. I feel really strongly, much like I did with the Python Software Foundation,
that turnover is good. And so I am right now in the midst of working as a VP of learning
for a startup called Notable.
And based on the work that I've done
in the Jupyter ecosystem and with Open Science.
And so we're creating a collaborative data platform
which helps everyone in teams work well together.
- That sounds really fun.
Awesome. - Yeah.
- So you don't have any worry about re-election.
You can just vote however you want.
You're unencumbered.
- I'm unencumbered and it's a great slate of people.
So I'm really, really pleased at how things have evolved
over time and obviously these fine folks
would be wonderful to be reelected,
but there's also a great group of folks
on the slate as well.
So I think we're in good shape.
- Yeah, fantastic.
Brett, welcome back.
- Thank you very much.
Background, so I'm calling from Vancouver
on the unceded traditional lands of the Musqueam,
Squamish, and Sale of Truth First Nations.
Very upfront on that.
I have been on the steering council since it started.
And as for a day job, I'm constantly trying to convince
Michael to try out VS Code for Python as the soft,
as the--
- The default way.
- For the Python extension of VS.
- Yeah, no, good work.
I mean, I've not seen a tool take off with such broad support.
You know, I always ask the question at the end of the show, like,
"What do you use to write Python these days?"
And nothing has a second derivative as high as VS Code.
Like, the rate of acceleration or adoption is really quite something.
So, you should be proud of that. It's awesome.
Oh, yes. I'm very proud of the team. They've done a great job.
Yeah, and you also now live on an island, right?
Right, didn't those storms like separate all the roads
from the rest of Canada?
- Yeah, for those who-- - You guys doing all right?
- Yeah, I'm fine.
For those of you who don't know,
we had a river of storms, literally,
that came through the greater Metro Vancouver area
and flooded out every single road in the greater area
such that there was literally no land link
to the rest of Canada through Canadian land.
You either had to fly out
or you had to go down through the States,
which also was flooded out near us
on the Pacific Northwest.
So it's a thing, no rail lines either.
The ports completely backed up
and we're like the third largest in North America
here in Vancouver.
So like I went to the grocery store yesterday,
our, the shelves were pretty bare.
Just logistical issues.
It's, I mean, I'm in Vancouver, I'm fine.
It was mainly out, the poor folks in the Fraser Valley
completely flooded out.
Like we have no clue what it's going to do
like half of all the dairy and all the chickens for the province come through there.
There's been a lot of, unfortunately, a lot of animals that drowned.
It's really bad.
But we'll get through it.
Unfortunately.
>>Victor: I'm glad you're OK.
That was quite a thing.
>>Chance: Yeah.
>>Victor: Pablo.
>>Chance: Hopefully on a higher note.
>>Victor: Hopefully.
Welcome.
>>Pablo Galindo.
I've been on the steering council for only this year.
So this was the first time serving.
I'm living in the exotic land of London.
And I work at Bloomer,
which is kind of a financial slash news company
in the Python infrastructure team.
So we do a very similar thing as Thomas team do,
but slightly different, I would say,
because we need to support all these,
not as exciting old systems
that banks like to use and whatnot.
But we also do a lot of very cool tools,
like debuggers and profilers
that we plan to open source soonish.
And we also make sure that Python experience
at the company is the better we can.
So we are in the best kind of department
after the seventh reorg or something.
So now we are supposed to take care of
that people are happy and whatnot.
Yeah, and people use a lot of VS Code apparently as well.
- I bet they do.
Fantastic.
I was just recommending the running MicroWSGI
production article from the Bloomberg Tech Engineering.
Oh right, right. That's Peter Sparrow, I think.
Yeah, just last week or something. That's a really, really neat stuff you guys are doing there.
Right, right. And yeah, I think the only, in CPython I mainly work on the parser and the garbage collector these days.
I've been working as well recently on improving error messages all around and
kind of user experience. Yeah, there's been a lot of
improvement on the error messages and tracebacks and things like that, right?
People have been more excited than you would expect to hear you
describe that. People are like, "This is so exciting, I can't wait to start using
this feature." Yeah, we finished the new parser and it's like, "Well, we can do
with this that it's not only like more syntax because like, you know, like people are like,
"Oh, now we have like all this syntax, right? Like that's not good." So I said, "Okay, let's
make something good so people don't demoralize the parser." So, you know, like they say, "Oh,
well, the messages are good, so let's leave the parser alone, right?"
- Exactly. Yeah, well, nice. - You're also the release manager, Pablo.
- Right, right. Sorry. Thanks, thanks. - It's a small thing.
- Thanks, buddy, yeah.
Yeah, and also the release manager for Python 3.10
and 3.11, which is going to be released this year,
late this year.
And yeah, apparently it's been a very cool release.
- Yeah, I've not noticed any problems
and it just rolled out nice and smooth.
- Yeah, that's a good sign because it's not that
there hasn't been any problems.
But only on the release side.
Once it's released, it's good and well, right?
- Yeah.
I mean, I'm also able to do because I have a good team of release managers,
all release managers helping me.
So thanks to all of them.
Yeah, fantastic.
Well, let's just get started with some definitions.
Maybe, Carol, you could also just tell us a little bit of history
since you were on the show as well.
Like, what is the steering council and then, you know, where did it come from?
Right?
This is a relatively new thing for Python.
It is a relatively new thing.
When Guido retired, he left it in the hands of the core developers to come up with a new
governance for the language.
And so I'm really proud of the core development team for coming up with several different
options for how to organize.
And then we voted as a group after we discussed it all.
And the steering council model was the one that won out.
It's five individuals from the Python community,
not necessarily core developers, but could be beyond,
who are basically entrusted with, by consensus,
building the direction and the future for Python,
both the language as well as the core development community.
And I think so far it's worked out really well,
through three terms, you know, I think we've faced a number of different issues
and we've done our best to include many different voices and do our best to steward
the whole entire ecosystem.
Well, I would say you all have done a great job because I haven't heard anything very much.
You know, it's in the sense that Python is still being released, features are still being
added to the language, maintenance is still being done, and there wasn't a big disruption
when Guido left. And there was a lot of uncertainty because, as you said, he said, "All right,
I need a break. I'm stepping back. I've been doing this for 30 years. That's a long time."
But he didn't want to impose a structure as the person with no skin in the game.
Yeah, I think the entire Python ecosystem, yourself and others, for really rallying around
and trying to make everything work. And I can't underestimate Eva's and the Python Software
Foundation's impact on that as well for their support. So I'm glad you haven't heard anything.
I can't say we've seen the same, but... Well, when you're in the eye of the hurricane,
It feels different. Yeah, or the middle of the hurricane rather.
Anyone else want to add anything to that? Just sort of the historical bits before we get into mechanics.
I think I want to be fair to Guido.
He said I'm going to give the core developers a chance to self-organize
before I decide on
a successor or something.
So it wasn't really him saying you guys figure it out. It was
I think core developers need to figure out what they want.
And he still is a core developer, and he was on the first steering council as well.
So there was a very deliberate transition of influence, I will say, instead of power.
But if the core developers hadn't figured something out,
then I'm pretty sure he would have decided for us.
And I think people probably would have been happy with that at that point.
But I am really glad that we got a working and very effective
steering council instead.
I think the thing I'll add is that over the years,
there was a lot that was sort of under specified in the steering
council spec.
And every year, we sort of figure out
what the right business is, how often we're going to meet,
what kinds of agenda we're going to take on.
So that's been really great.
It's been great to work with everybody here
and everybody in the community to kind of figure out
how the steering council is gonna work.
And I think we've gotten to a place
where it's very effective.
- Yeah, and there are other organizations
sort of playing in that space.
We have the core developers, right?
We've got the board of directors,
Thomas, you've already mentioned,
and then you've got the steering council.
So where does the steering council fit in there?
What's the responsibility of the steering council?
Are you overseeing the core developers?
Do you work with them?
How does this all fit together?
- So I think PEP 13 does a reasonable job explaining this.
The idea is that Hito wasn't,
he was called the benevolent dictator,
but he wasn't really dictating all that much.
He was basically the final arbiter,
and he let the core dev community make its decisions.
delegate? Well, I mean he did push his opinion through when he knew he was right and I think
history has shown that he was right more often than not. But the core developers are the people
with commit bit rights in the GitHub repo. That's basically it. It's the people who've contributed a
lot to Python at various bits and pieces or overall. And I think everyone there has earned
the right to self-organize, so that's what the Steering Council is. But it is still consensus-based.
The mandate of the Steering Council is to figure out what the core developers want.
It's not for us to impose our opinion on the core developers, unless there is no other
way.
Some organization or somebody has to decide if it's 40, 60 percent plus and against some
idea, somebody's got to go, "We're going to do it or not do it."
That used to be Guido, and now it's you all, right?
Yes.
So, I mean, it's easy when there's a clear answer.
It's easy when everyone's clearly in favor or against something.
It is the 40-60 things, the difficult decisions where we also have to take our time to understand
the problem and see how it affects people and carefully make that kind of decision.
And I'll just point out that the PSF board of directors is not specifically involved
with the core developers.
So the PSF is for community work, it's for fundraising, it's for the trademarks, it's
the copyright owners, it's also for legal things.
But the PSF doesn't dictate what direction Python should, the language should be going.
It just talks about the community.
So it's a completely separate concern there.
But we did have the executive director, Eva,
sit in on our weekly meetings and help us
with administration.
And we hired the developer in residence.
That is to say that the steering council hired the PSF
employee that is Lukasz, the developer in residence.
So there is a lot of interaction as well.
But it's mostly the steering council
using the Python SoFar foundation, I would say.
- Okay, great.
Carol, it looked like you were gonna add something.
- Yeah, I was just gonna say,
in terms of like the 60/40 decisions,
there's been very few of those.
And part of the reason is when there isn't consensus,
what we do is work like, for example,
pattern matching was one where we asked the pep
to be reworked several times.
so that we wound up with a better solution in the end
than what we would have if we had just voted
yay or nay at the start.
So I think that's an important thing to remember.
- Yeah, it helps that all of you are
on the technical side of things, right?
As opposed to overseeing this or whatever, right?
It really helps that you can get in there and say,
no, no, no, this is gonna have performance implications
or just kind of have breaking changes or whatever.
- Absolutely.
And we come at it from different places too.
So that's also an interesting thing
that's been, I think, really valuable for us.
- Yeah, yeah.
Carol, you come at it from the science,
the data science and scientific side a little bit more.
And Brett comes at it from the editor side.
No, I'm just kidding, Brett.
(laughing)
Yeah, I know.
Fantastic.
- So when are the elections
and then how long do you serve for?
- The elections are right now.
They close I think on Wednesday, the 15th of December,
anywhere on earth.
So I, or is it Tuesday, anywhere on earth?
It's somewhere around there.
- It's Wednesday, somewhere anywhere, yeah.
- Yeah.
And they've been going for the last two weeks.
So the way it works is when the major Python version
is released, so 3.10 in this case,
that triggers the elections of the new steering council.
Since we have releases every year,
that means we have a new steering council every year.
And we have a single one-year term.
So everyone gets reelected or not at the end there.
There's a two-week nomination period,
and then we have a two-week sort of discussion period,
and then a two-week vote period.
And so we're nearly at the end of the two-week vote period.
So by Wednesday, Thursday, we should have a new steering council.
And as Carol mentioned, Carol's not up for re-election, decided not to go for re-election.
The rest of us is.
We have no idea if we're in the running or not.
I mean, the slate is just really great.
So it could be just five new people entirely, which I would be more than happy with.
I have more than enough to do as it is.
Yeah. Do you think it would make sense to have one person stay around as sort of some continuity?
Or it probably is going to happen just statistically, right?
I guess we've talked about it, you know. I mean, that's sort of the nice thing, right?
It's like we adjust. Things aren't necessarily set in stone. So, for example, when the first
steering council was elected, right, when Guido retired, we were actually on an 18-month
release cycle. So there was a lot more time between elections and now that we're on a yearly release
cycle, we've decided to keep the steering council elections aligned with Python releases. It seems
to be working okay and if it doesn't, then we'll have a discussion about that as a community and
propose changes, but so far so good. Yeah, absolutely. Pablo, and also... Go ahead,
Thomas? I was just going to say we used to have EVA as sort of the administrative
memory of the steering council, even though I think there was an overlap of four people
at every single past election, so it didn't really matter. Even though I am, you know,
I have taken over some of EVA duties, if I am not re-elected on the steering council, I won't be
attending as the PSF representative because that just doesn't feel right.
But it might be that the next executive director does step up and take that position. So we might
have the PSF executive director as the one person who's been in multiple steering councils and can
transfer over things. Yeah, and that would give the PSF a seat at the table as well. Well, it's
It's more about information flowing from the PSF to the steering council than the other direction,
because the PSF doesn't really involve itself in the steering council things.
But there is the developer-in-residence, there's money, there's sponsorships.
There's a sponsorship benefit to PSF sponsors that they get to have a little chat with the steering council,
which each steering council has to ratify.
It's not a done deal for the next steering council
But it's just a nice a nice way to have some connection with the people who care a lot about Python
Companies that care a lot about Python
And we also we do have a handover meeting for the next steering council where we'll have both the old steering council members and the
New steering council members and make sure that you know discuss any
Running issues anything that the new steering council needs to know
So it's not even if five new people get elected
It's not that we're just throwing them out, you know in the wild and let them figure it out on their own
We're still there. We're still part of the community even if we don't get to realize. Yeah, true. You're all still core developers
They could still reach out to you and and ask help about something. Yeah
I want to talk about two people really quick while we're sort of touched on both of them Thomas
One is just to say thanks to Eva that she's done a lot of work
and she's been at it for 10 years or something like that, right?
10 years as the
Secretary or Director of Operations or Executive Director of PSF. She was involved in organizing, or she was organizing PyCon
before then, so she's involved in PyCon even longer than that.
Yeah. Yeah. And for those who are not watching the live stream,
But pretty much the whole string canceled, just did a little silent applause.
So we all miss her dearly and it's only been a week.
Yeah, absolutely.
Best of luck to whatever she's off to do next.
Also Betsy.
Betsy did a lot as well.
And thanks.
She's also moved on.
So yeah, Betsy.
Betsy was assistant secretary, I think, of the PSF and also organizing sponsorships and
all that.
It involved a lot of community efforts.
- Especially at PyCon, it seemed like she did a lot there.
- Yeah.
And both of them, so much of what they did
was behind the scenes, and I can't thank enough
their work ethic and how helpful they have been to me
and the steering council on so many different levels.
So we certainly miss them, but we also wish them
the best in their next adventures.
- Yeah.
All right, with that, serious thanks.
I do want to show something I think you all will be amused by.
I don't know if you, have you all seen this,
this Twitter thread here?
(laughs)
- Yes.
- There was a great mention by Patrick Mason saying,
"Hey, the PSF, the @, you know,
thus, basically, @PSF on Twitter,
is searching for an executive director.
Here's the job announcement."
Has this been filled yet, this role?
- We're still looking for it.
I mean the process isn't, oh we like someone, we're hiring them.
There's a whole search committee and there's resumes to go through and then there's interviews
to have.
We're in the process of interviewing a whole bunch of people via the search company.
Is it still open for applicants or is it kind of, you have tons and now you're going through
them?
We have really good candidates, but I think more is always welcome.
So right up until we decide, especially in December, I think more resumes.
Yeah, great. If people want to apply, absolutely.
Cool. Okay. I'll put a link in the show notes for that.
But of course, @PSF is the Pacific Salmon Foundation, and they kindly respond
@thePSF is looking for an executive director, @PSF is not currently.
Good luck on your search. Sorry for the confusion.
and then they responded, "It happens.
We're starting to feel like @ThePSFFamily.
It's not like @JavaEvercalls.
Broken heart."
I thought that was a good way to respond to it there.
- But yeah, there was a lot of,
I think Dustin Ingram, one of the PSF board directors
and also a Googler, got a follow
from the Pacific Salmon Foundation,
even though he's never had a follow from the PSF.
So I thought that was extra funny.
Yeah, that was really funny.
Nice and lighthearted.
Now, I also want to ask about the developer in Residence
and how has Lukasz's work helped you all out?
I mean, I'm sure Pablo, he was the prior release manager
and is also dedicated to helping this be smooth.
So maybe had an even bigger effect on you.
But what's the developer in Residence role interaction
with you all?
Yeah, I think this is one of the things that we are more proud of bootstrapping.
It took a lot of time because we had excellent candidates, all of them,
and it was not an easy decision.
But I think so far also, like, Lucas has made an excellent job.
So I think one of the things he was working on a lot
is trying to help with the review kind of queue.
That's one of the things he's been putting a lot of work.
It's extremely difficult because we had a lot of PRs,
And I think he has already been on the show before.
Yeah, we actually, I interviewed him about,
specifically about that role, yeah.
Yeah, so I would probably defer listeners
to that particular episode.
But I think that has a lot of impact,
but there has been a lot of other places
that maybe are a bit less known
when he has been helping a lot.
Like for instance, on the releases,
like doing Python releases is quite involved,
to say it in some good way.
Is it harder to do a major release like a 3.9 to 3.10?
Like 3.10.0, is that harder than 3.10.1?
Oh yeah, absolutely. There are two moments that are especially bad.
One of them is the first beta release because what happens is that on the first beta release
is the point when no new features can be added and technically from that point until the final release
It's only bug fixes and things like that.
Although people try to stretch the definition of a bug fix quite a lot because there has
always been the strategy of like, "I can push maybe this feature like half-baked and
then call it a bug."
And then it's like, "Oh, I'm doing a bug fix."
So that's when the role of the release manager is quite important because you need to be
human.
So sometimes people are computing on their free time, so maybe they tell you, "I don't
don't really have time for this, but like you know blah blah. So you know there is
there is always time for discussions, but but also like you need to be careful
with that. And the other problem that happens is actually you know because
it's a deadline everybody pushes everything on the last day. It's like
this incredible amount of activity and some of the you know systems that we
have to check everything they take a lot of time to do their checks because
they are quite a slow checks that take like three, four, five hours. Right, every
unit test for the entire C++ fleet.
>> We have a big CI that test us on Windows,
macOS, and Linux,
but then we have this thing called Build Bots,
that basically machines that are donated or that we run,
that test us on flavors of these platforms,
so different distributions and different versions of macOS,
but also it runs heavier checks,
like sanitizers, checks for reference leaks.
So it's these things that take,
If you put that thing on the CIA, everybody would hide it.
In the sense that it would be ridiculous.
We have these things and they don't run on a single commit,
they run on batches, so basically all commits of the day.
Then if it fails, you need to do some manual bisection.
But anyway, what happens is that because everybody pushes that,
and then you need to release at the end of the day,
you need to wait for these machines to run,
and then what happens is that everything is extremely broken.
So normally up to this point it was kind of, it was a bit weird because like technically
people are, you know, responsible for things that break or they push broken.
But at the end of the day it's kind of like it's the release manager that finds people
to fix it or I fix it myself a lot of these things.
And it's very stressful because you know like people are waiting for your release and it's
a quite important release to start testing and you know like the distributors are waiting
for you because they have their calendars.
And those nights have been extremely stressful, for sure.
I mean, and three times has been as well, but like, with the help of Guke, actually,
we've been coordinating with this.
And if not, like, for instance, last time, we've been like fixing between the two of
us all these little things.
Sometimes you need to revert the thing because, you know, it's like, it's so broken that we
don't have the time to like find out what's going on or like too risky to think like,
you know, maybe it's fixed, but who knows?
You know sometimes we just that would be a bummer if your PR failed through CI and you got a wait a year
Before it was two years before it was two years and you know like people don't get happy when you push them back your feature
It was a year and a half
But I still a squad all time like especially if you miss the line because well
Don't put things off until the last day. Come on
Yeah, people don't understand the thing as well as you would think.
Yeah, Thomas, you can say this.
Yeah, I was...
And then there's the reality of human behavior.
Yeah, yeah.
I know.
You know, like...
But it's good advice.
People get quite angry.
But in a good way.
I mean, it's not like, you know, we are all friends here in the Core team.
You know, like, it's important to have...
I think one of the important parts of being a release manager is that you need to have
good communication skills, because it's not only about, like, the technical part.
also like communicating. I think like Lucas in this case has been also doing a very good job.
He communicates quite well and especially in tricky situations and I think that that is an
asset of the position. You need to interact with a lot of different people in the team.
People sometimes they say "oh you're paid for this" or "here's all my land release" and you
know like you need to also tell them like "no I mean we have these priorities" and whatnot. But yeah
so this has been an area where he has been helping a lot doing releases. He's still doing releases
himself right because three nine dot whatever we're at now still happens
release manager is kind of a long it's a long service yeah
um we need to actually find the next release manager for uh
this is about this is about the time that we we try to find you know
how do you do that barry we we have a a small group of of former
release managers kind of we throw around some names and then we
find somebody to I guess
Convince they look for someone to volunteer
Yeah, exactly. Exactly. We have like a long chain with a big ball at the end
We gotta try this
No one will ever approach benjamin peterson's, man that that was a bad deal
Yeah, he was the benjamin was the
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, he did not sign up for 10 years of bug-fixed releases.
It's also like people I think underestimate the work of releasing an operative system,
like a programming language. Yeah, I cannot imagine releasing a Linux kernel version, but like
it's a multi-hour process, quite a lot, and you know like there is always when people say, "Oh,
can you automate this thing with GitHub Actions?" and it's like, "Oh, come on, I mean,
Good luck. We have already a huge amount of automation, but there is a lot of processes that are manual.
It's ridiculous. Or there are so many ways it can fail and you need manual intervention.
I mean, I have something already that for minor releases, like alpha releases and whatnot,
which are a bit like, you don't need to build documentation and whatnot, it's almost automatic,
even waiting for humans to do things.
But for big ones like betas and final releases,
it's five hours of using it now.
Yeah. There's a lot of problems that happen on the go,
so it's impossible to do it.
>> Pablo has also live-streamed all this.
So if you really want to see all the effort that goes into it,
you can including watching him.
If you go back, watch where he breaks GitHub.
So there's a lot that goes on in those releases.
Yeah, that's right. I think I saw you guys all sitting down and live streaming on YouTube.
It was just Pablo and Lukasz and the other release managers.
Not the steering council. Just to make sure. The rest of the steering council stays away from all that.
We know too well.
I did want to bring it a little bit back to Lukasz's work and the developer in residence
position because it was funded for one year so far by Google because of some money that
was lying around and they wanted a good place to donate it.
Eva sold it to them or Dustin sold it to them, I'm not sure what happened there.
I wasn't actually involved myself,
but it is something that we need to fundraise for
in the future to continue it or maybe expand it.
We've already talked amongst ourselves saying
we would love to have three developers in residence
instead of just the one.
We've had some really good candidates when we hired Lukasz.
Other candidates, I don't know if they'd be in the running,
but there's clearly enough interest.
There's clearly enough work as well.
Lucas has been focusing a little bit on selling the position as well because he was very aware
from the start that for it to continue we need more funding. So he's been trying to make the
case with his work, make the case that this is a good thing to have and something that people
should invest money in, which is why we have the weekly developer in residence reports that he does
for instance, to showcase the work and all that.
Yeah, he's very much out in the open about that, right?
He does his sort of weekly blog and summary of almost the report you would give to a manager,
but his managers are the community, and so it just publishes it, right?
Well, in a very real sense, that is the case.
It's not a manager who prioritizes the work, because that's us, sort of.
He does it on his own mostly, but we're there.
But it is the people he is accountable to, the way he feels it, and I think we all feel
it that way.
It's the community work, and he's supposed to be doing the things that need to be done,
but that you can't really demand of volunteers that they do.
So I think that's working out fairly well.
Yeah, and it's also the context switching, right?
Every one of you has something you've got to work on for your day job, and then to come
back and work on a PR or a bug or triage something or help somebody get CPython to compile on
their machine so they can contribute.
All of those things are better done if you just stay in the flow of going through the
issues and going through stuff.
He can do that full time, right?
Yes.
He has the full time to spend on all of those things, so he's still context switching a
lot.
But he can spend a couple of hours.
The context is more tightly grouped.
Yeah.
Yeah, and I think it gives the language a continuity
and a sustainability of not every--
people are going to have to onboard and offboard.
We've seen that very much within the pandemic.
And it kind of gives us a baseline
that things are running as it should be.
And also, he's made a lot of automation improvements
as well. So, you know, there's an incremental, like, let's make it better each year.
Yeah. Yeah, absolutely.
How involved or if at all were you with the steering council and getting a move to GitHub?
To like the repo or the issues?
Yeah, the repo, not the issues.
I know the issues are still coming, right?
They're not there yet, are they?
Yeah. Yeah.
Working on that.
Yeah, but the initial get the code over there, get the--
I think the steering council didn't exist.
Yeah, I was trying to think about the time.
It just preceded that, didn't it?
Yeah.
I mean, Brett actually was very involved into that.
[INAUDIBLE]
I think-- yeah, Brett's been involved
in every change to our version control system
probably since the CBS days.
I was going to make a joke about CBS.
Come on.
Yeah.
Yes.
[LAUGHTER]
I don't think, I was involved with CVS to Subversion,
but everything subsequently I've somehow been involved with.
- Yeah, yeah, so how, are you happy to see it
on GitHub now, Brett?
- Since I'm the one that made that happen, yes.
(laughing)
- Well, I mean, you could regret it.
- No. - I would think so.
No, it seems like it's gone well.
- Yeah, it's worked out pretty well, I think.
There were some bumps way back, like for instance,
I wasn't expecting quite so many core devs
who don't contribute to any other open source
except Python and thus they didn't know GitHub
and they didn't know it at all.
- Yeah, you completely changed their workflow, right?
- Yeah, so it was one of these things,
it was a learning experience for some people
and we just had to help them along.
There's a whole doc I think,
might still be there in the DevGuard
of how to get from material users and all that.
So it's definitely been great
- And I'm really appreciative that one of the things
we've been able to do this year, the steering council,
is we're very close to moving our issue tracker
over to GitHub as well, so there'll be a bit more
of a connection between the PRs and the issues,
and we don't have to maintain our own infrastructure
anymore, which has always been somewhat of a burden.
Poor E's been having to keep bugs.python.org
running this whole time, when he's got everything else
on his plate, he always has to keep up and running.
So, yeah, but I mean, Marietta, for instance,
deserves a lot of the credit for pushing this,
because she wrote the original PEP,
and it's always been poking people like,
"Hey, can we still do this?
'Cause it's still happening, what's going on?"
And thanks to the PSF for getting the money together
through GitHub's donations to make sure that this happens
and coordinating all that money and all that hiring.
So we're able to have at CIOs of Core Dev work on this.
And we've been kind of project managing it
towards the end on this to get it over the finish line,
but it's looking good.
And the goal now is hopefully January sometime
we'll be flipping the switch and moving over.
- Yeah, that's coming up quick.
- Yep.
- Yeah.
- I think that's sort of like, you know,
an under appreciated perhaps contribution to Python, right?
It's like Mariana has done an amazing amount of work
and Brett's done a lot of this as well
is to make those kind of like GitHub workflows
really natural and easy to use.
So, you know, there's lots of people
who contribute to Python in ways
that are maybe not quite as obvious
as what the steering council does,
but are just as important, if not more important,
for making the whole experience of developing Python
really smooth and easy to do.
- Yeah, I think also kind of nowadays,
there is, I mean, more and more people
are conscious of this, but I think there is also
like a special emphasis on like,
when you contribute this code, right?
Like, and then even like people feel that,
or they have been like doing documentation contributions
or even like CI contributions or whatever, right?
they say like, "Oh, I didn't continue to see Python." I mean, come on. Like, in the sense
that I think, you know, it's important for us to highlight this and, you know, there
is a lot of, even core developers, there is a lot of core developers that don't continue
to code, like even just, you know, try dragging and all those things that those are as important
or even more. Like, you know, code is not a small part, but it's also by far not the
full picture, right? Like, even if you take Gukka's work, right? Like, he's not coding
not much as the developer in Resin.
I mean, he does some coding, right?
And that, you see the impact that he's having, right?
Like literally, we are searching for someone
who does that kind of work because it's needed.
No, we are not searching for an excellent coder, right?
Like, we already have a lot of those.
So, you know, like, I think it's important to highlight,
and I would like to take the time to say here
that when people think about contributing,
you know, you don't need to think about code.
You don't have to master pointers to pointers, you know, there's a lot of ways to contribute.
And you know, there is a lot of people that go and it's always the same thing.
I'm spending a lot of time mentoring new core developers, like the last four core developers
were people that I helped mentoring, myself partially.
And you know, it always happens.
I mean, I've been also very lucky and like the last core developers that I've been mentoring
has been extremely smart people and super competent, so it's not been a problem.
from the people that are starting to contribute for the first time, it's always the first
question is like, how do I find issues that I can work on, right?
Or PRs, which is the most difficult thing to solve because it's not only like, what
do you like and what are your skills or interests, but it's also like, CPython is a fairly mature
codebase, it's not that easy as like, oh, there is this thing, I pick it up.
But the key here is that a lot of people don't think about the fact that you don't need to
think out like because they think bugs like what is the bug or what is the feature you know like
that I cannot a lot of the time what happens is that the easier parts are actually for even for
them right I mean maybe there is a programmer that really likes coding and you know it's very
easy to say it's like work on this or do you like packaging work on that but like a lot of people
actually you know are very passionate precisely about other things and they come from a point
that core developers don't have like for instance documentation we are quite bad at writing
documentation not because we don't have the skills that we do is because we are
already we are thinking like all developers so we are like okay yeah I
think I know how to I know the system so I'm documenting this as I think you know
and for someone who is hard to see with new eyes yeah yeah or like from the user
perspective like maybe we put a lot of detail that is not important and you
know makes the difficult or maybe we are missing some things that we think as
implementation detail but there's other is not so you know that is quite
important and I'm happy to see that more and more people are working on these kind of things and
those contributions are super important. Maybe that's where you can have a huge amount of impact
right, like instead of fixing bugs. I mean fixing bugs is also important but I think my first PR in
CPython was in documentation. I'm super proud of it. Actually Marietta was the person who merged it
interesting data. So I think it's important to mention that and more and more people now
are helping with things like CI because they are super knowledgeable about GitHub
actions and they say "Oh actually this is very inefficient, maybe you can do this and blah blah blah"
Maybe you can have in the PRs comments from the compiler warnings, that's
something that someone could use and that is fantastic. How many bugs are going to be
be solved just because you know like for us for even for Lucas and myself like
helps a lot because we don't need to when we see the warnings we don't need
to fix it ourselves because like is there I said so those those changes are
actually more long-lasting or even the yeah and that's the kind of thing that's
a little orthogonal to the main CPython code that you can go and say I'm gonna
just try to make the error message more descriptive and that's right less likely
to cause some sort of butterfly effect.
Like, well, I changed the speed of the C eval C loop,
and that has all these knock-on effects, right?
Like, no, there's just-- we put in more details
into the string as part of the error.
That's way more doable, right?
That kind of stuff as well.
>>And I would-- yeah, and that's the last thing I want to say.
A good example as well is, if you think about it,
is the last-- the better errors thing.
I mean, there is a lot of technical stuff there.
but one thing that happened is that now a lot of contributors are actually contributing
the errors themselves.
I mean, there's some part of the government, but it's not focused on code or fixing or
adding infrastructure.
It's because they like to have better errors and they are very passionate about it.
And that is fantastic because it's also a different area when you can have a...
You were saying that apparently people are super happy about that.
I've been contributing in very core parts of the Python.
I would never thought that this was something that is going to be.
>> You wouldn't think.
>> So much of it.
>> But if you are in the training business,
like if you are going and doing
an in-person event or a workshop and the students are stuck,
and now they have a message that gives them more info,
that helps a lot of things go more smoothly.
So, Brett, I'll throw this question at you first here.
What are some of the big during the tenure of this group so this year basically?
What were some of the big or?
Hard things that you had to decide upon oh
Wow all right hard
Well honestly if we're gonna be honest anything conduct related is always hard
Stuff comes up and as the final deciders as it were,
or the great deciders for the core team,
sometimes contact stuff comes up and we--
- Out in the audience,
PyLang refers to you all as the dream team, so.
- Thanks for that.
But yeah, contact is always the hardest.
We don't like it, no one likes it, it's tough.
We're very lucky that the PSF contact working group
backs us.
disclaimer, I'm on it as well, but I also recuse myself
whenever Python core stuff comes up.
But we're really gonna have them to help us give guidance
because that's what the kind of work group's there for,
is actually to provide guidance
that actually can't enforce anything.
But we lean on them to kind of act as independent arbiters
of everything 'cause for a lot of us, we've been here,
I mean, we've been on this team long enough
that we pretty much know everybody, right?
And a lot of us are friends, it's hard to be impartial.
There's a lot of history as well, people.
So we lean on the Conduct Workgroup
to help act as the independent body that
doesn't have all that baggage, as it were, with people.
But then it comes back to us, and we
have to make a final decision of what
are we going to do about this.
And that's hard every time.
It's not fun.
It's stressful as heck.
If it's ever reached that point, it's not great.
Yeah, I would put those in the quadrant of hard and not fun.
There are other ones that are in sort of a hard but fun
kind of quadrant where, you know, some of the technical peps and things like that, pattern
matching was probably one of the most recent ones where you really have to think through
some difficult technical problems, but that's kind of the fun part of doing this, right?
Like we enjoy that, even though it's hard, it's still a fun part of the job.
So hopefully there'll be more of those and fewer of the fun
and not, or not fun and hard.
- Yes.
- Yeah, probably the closest I can think of
off the top of my head was deciding for 3.10
not to make from Dunder Future important.
- Yeah, that was quite important.
- That was a really tough one because--
- That was a lot of stuff happening in the community.
People, certain framework authors are like,
you're gonna break our framework
'cause we depend upon this and whatnot, right?
- Right, yeah, I mean it was one of these things
where that PEP was written and accepted, I think,
like two months after Pydantic was even created.
- Yeah, yeah, Pydantic and FastAPI
were two of the most popular--
- Exactly, and stuff has just changed
since that PEP got accepted way back when.
I think even that was, I don't think that was even,
steering council doesn't think that was a Guido decision.
- No, no, no.
- It was a Guido, delegated to Lukasz decision.
- Right, so that was a bit stressful
'cause it all happened right before beta, right?
And it was a lot of, it was people reach out to people,
there was a bit of panic in some corners of the community,
but we did the best we could to reach out to everyone
and say like, "No, let's have a discussion,
"we can figure this out."
And we just discussed it with everyone involved
on both sides of the type,
all sides of the type of community,
both dynamic and static, and just chatted with people.
I was like, "Look, we can't rush this,
"and it's looking like this decision is gonna feel rushed
"based on the feedback we're getting very near beta."
So forget it, we're just gonna rip the code out,
which thank you Pablo for reverting that work
'cause that was a messy back revert.
- Next time I can dump that on Google.
- Exactly, yeah.
'Cause this was pre-dev in residence, right?
- Yeah, yeah.
- Deal with this.
But it was tough.
But I think everyone involved was happy
with the decision that was made in the end.
I have no regrets.
I don't think anyone else in the string has all those regrets.
I think everyone involved feels like
it was the right decision not to rush that.
We still have to make a decision, which is tough.
We've asked the community to see if anyone wanted
to step forward to actually talk with all areas
of the typing world to see like the PEP 649,
which Larry Hastings has proposed as a solution
to the problem of runtime types and binding
and all this, a lot of stuff.
We've asked the community, can someone step forward
and kind of act as almost a champion or a shepherd
or an expert to come talk to us to explain,
like, have we hit all of the potential issues
with the gender futures import annotations
or a PEP six variance proposal or something else?
And honestly, no one stepped forward.
So this is actually one of those things
where the steering council might actually,
in 2022, have to come forward and be like,
we'll have to champion this ourselves,
we'll have to do the legwork,
and we'll just have to do it, and it'll take time,
but that's what we're here for,
is if we ask the community to do something
and no one wants to do it.
where the backstop to make sure stuff still happens and works.
>> Yeah, sure. Maybe give people who have been tracking that super closely,
just a quick summary of what was that feature and why did it cause a problem?
>> Yeah. So the FromDunder feature import annotations,
what it did was is it made all type annotations strings,
which for performance reasons and forward reference problems is really handy.
Like there's no overhead in import.
Everything is just a string.
It's in the code object.
It's nice and fast.
And if you need to reference something in the same module
before you've actually gotten to define it, right?
Like if you have circular references.
- Right, a class method that returns its own self.
So you would just-- - Yeah, exactly.
Or you've got a class, yeah.
Or class A has an attribute of class B,
class B's got reference A,
and it takes care of all that 'cause it's just strings.
There's nothing to really do there.
And then the type checkers just handle
the circular references, it's not a problem.
The problem is, is projects like Pydantic,
which various other projects like Press API depend on,
that messes them up because they need to actually convert
those strings back to the original objects that they represent.
>> Right. Because they want to rich type information out of that.
They need to see the real type.
>> They want the actual object that that type annotation defines.
When you do list bracket int,
they want that actual object that that
represents so they can get at that information.
"Oh, okay, this is typed to a list of ints."
Not just, "Oh, it's a string.
"I don't know what the heck that is."
And there's a function in the standard library
that you can call in the InSpec typing module, I believe,
which is now in the InSpec module,
a better version of the InSpec module,
that will give you the actual objects.
But the problem is, is you still have
this reference problem and a couple other things,
and it's not worked perfectly.
And that's why the dynamic typing side,
the live typing side, as it were,
the typing community got really worried
when they realized this was about to become
the permanent thing, and why we stopped.
Now, there is a PEP, PEP 649,
which tries to use closures instead
to kind of capture all the variables and everything,
but not execute anything, right?
It's very much like a function closure you'd use today,
where you had a function and a function,
and that inner function refers to something
in the outer function.
Nothing's actually happened yet,
but at least that reference is still there
so it knows where to look for stuff.
The problem is, is we don't know if 649 fixes enough things
for that to be the solution we want to go with
'cause we don't think we're gonna get another chance
to tweak this, right?
If we're gonna try to come up with a solution
that fixes all the problems that
from Thunderfuture import annotations fixes,
we also have to make sure it fixes
as many of the other problems that also exist
at the same time so that we only do this once
because this is potentially messy.
And it doesn't have to fix everything,
but anything that it doesn't fix
probably will never get fixed.
So we have to be prepared to live with that.
- And be very aware of what those non-fixed situations are.
- I think the second aspect is the key.
I think it's probably what is making this so difficult
that we already have future input
and we don't want like three of them
or like combination of them or like whatnot.
So I think it's important.
And this is the most difficult thing for us
because like, as a student council,
We like reviewing Pepsi is extremely time consuming
and whatnot because you need to not only be aware
of like the change itself, but also like what,
because documents are written by the authors, right?
And then you need to, I mean, it's not like
that is ill intention or anything,
but there is a lot of things that maybe are left out
or like, so you need to make sense of the void
that is behind this thing, right?
Or like what is the far reaching effects.
And in this case, the problem is that
how many other things don't we know
that is not going to work because, you know,
Like now we, like you see, we knew all these use cases
days before beta, like what else about all the people
that are not contact us.
- Yeah.
- Right, and one thing I want to say as well is
because this is important, like we care about like,
you know, the Anticompass API,
but we care about everything else, right?
It's not, you don't need to be the author of a big framework
to have the Steam Council attention,
and that's quite important.
Yeah, I think it's important to remark, right?
Because you know, it's important because there's a lot
people using this use case and therefore it has more weight.
That's true just because if we mess up,
it's going to affect more people than some random library.
The random library is also important as long as it's
using the interfaces that we provide in some way.
This is important to know because maybe there is a community of people that use
type annotations for database tables or who knows.
Then they didn't follow
contacting the Steam Council or Python dev or whatever. So you know it's important if you're
listening to this and then you're an author of libraries that use type annotations or even a user
that uses type annotations in non-standard ways, it's very important to reach to us and maybe in
the future to this person who's going to lead this effort because we absolutely need to know
what these peps are not going to fix. So we say as a Steam Council, okay we take the, or the next
extinguished, right? We take the informed decision to accept this PEP even if these
use cases are going to be sacrificed because as Thomas says, we cannot fix everything, right?
But we must know where we're lifting it up because what we cannot have is now, you know,
this situation again because we missed blah blah blah. You only get so many re-dos. Carol?
Right. Yeah, I mean, there's so many different communication levels on this whole thing. I mean,
As you know, Michael, from doing all your courses, a 30-year-old language that has many
different use cases, it's hard to sort of one size fits all.
I think I reached out to Sebastian and Samuel because we had been using FastAPI with great
success and our engineers really loved it.
And I think it is something that is re-energizing the whole web-based side of Python.
So you don't want to sort of cut that off at its knees.
Exactly.
It's one of the things taking advantage of so many of the cool new features, the typing,
the async and all those things and whatnot.
Right.
But by the same token, it also, as a library writer with JupyterHub and Binder, it's really
hard to keep up with everything. And, you know, we try to always test ahead, but not everybody
will and can do that. And then also, you know, what you do is you understand your library
well, but you don't necessarily understand the Python internals at the same level or the same
depth. And so I think Lukasz's proactive, you know, reports out as well as Pablo's amazing
release notes in the last couple of years helps to communicate out what's going on. And this was
an unfortunate, you know, last minute revert. And, you know, I think the whole community working
together is really what's needed to be successful over time. And I'm glad we, although it was
tough in the moment, I'm glad we sort of weathered through that because we've seen growth all
around as a result of it.
Yeah, absolutely. Really quickly, because we're getting short on time, Alvaro out in
the audience asked, was enum.strenum delay related to breaking Pydantic?
We can give a really quick answer.
No, had nothing to do whatsoever with Pydantic.
All right, cool.
This is-- Ethan's been working on a bunch of changes
to the enum module and making the wrapper and stirrer
of enums make more sense.
Oh, that's great.
And there were some changes that we
weren't sure if they were going to impact users
in a negative way.
So we just wanted to make sure that we understood the decision
and why it was made.
So we asked him to revert it for 3.10 and then write a PEP
to propose the changes, just because of the scale
and the impact of the changes, propose a PEP for 3.11,
and we ended up rejecting that PEP.
So that was just purely based on the change that was made
and the rationale for the change.
And not any-- we don't know of any actual breakage that
would have happened, but it's just not something
that we were comfortable with.
parse the repper and it doesn't work anymore or something.
>> Well, logging it and that kind of thing.
You never know where those things end up.
So yeah.
>> Yeah. Brett, it looks like you're going to add one more thing.
Then we're getting short on time.
Maybe I'll ask you one more question then.
>> It was just an aside,
but just to show how much of a fan I am.
Last week on Python Bytes,
you and Brian were asking whether 3.10.1 was a security concern or not.
I was just going to say, call out Pablo's great release notes.
If they don't scream security,
It's not a security problem.
All right, super.
Because if I go and check the Apple release notes for some OS updates,
it's like, oh, it contains this little thing and other possible security.
Like, you know, sometimes you don't know.
No, we are very thorough with those notes.
And when we release, actually, it's possible that we release extra versions
when there is something very important.
I think 9 has actually a bunch of those.
For the time being, I have not been forced to do any of this.
but sometimes there is CVs and whatnot.
We are very into that.
So yeah, unless we say it's kind of--
Well, I just want to thank everyone
in the entire Python community for not
writing a sub-language instead of logging for Python.
It's funny because the logging module was definitely
inspired by the Java logging module.
Yeah, you can tell by the names.
VNA didn't decide to include that particular load of class.
Remote pickles or whatever the equivalent would be.
Right, right.
Fantastic. All right. Let's close out our conversation here, which has been great,
with maybe the challenges or the opportunities, whichever side of the glass fullness you want to take,
for the Python community that you all see.
see like what do you see as like a big opportunity or maybe as a big thing we
need to be aware of and try to work to avoid. Barry go with you first I guess
since you're at the top of the video. Oh I'm gonna steal probably the thunder I guess I
think the two really interesting things that are happening in Python land these
days are the faster CPython work that Guido and his team is working on over at
Microsoft and I think the other really interesting thing is Sam
Gross's no-gill work. From a technical standpoint I think you know we can we
have a lot of smart people in the community we can work through the
technical parts of it I think the really interesting thing will be the sort of
the social aspects and how we make all that work and get people comfortable
with those changes. It's easy to make everything faster, better, stronger but if
there's compromises all of a sudden it becomes a challenge. Yeah Thomas, you want to go next?
Well, I'm just going to say finding a new executive director for the Python Software
Foundation is right up there for me because that may have significant impact on the long-term
goals of the PSF and the direction of the community and all that.
Even though the PSF is very much driven by the community, it's still a big deal.
However, I do realize most of the community probably doesn't care and it's all happening
behind the scenes.
So I'm just going to say the Sam Gross thing is the thing that I think is the great opportunity.
It's going to take years to land an interpreter that doesn't have a gill,
and it's going to break a bunch of things.
And we just need to be very deliberate and shever that correctly and make sure
that there's a migration path for users and as little impact as we can manage.
>> Yeah, absolutely.
That's a good one.
Carol?
Yeah, I mean, I think I see a really, really bright future for Python for a couple reasons.
One, our community has always embraced education and continual learning, and I think that is part
of having a vibrant language after 30 years. Yeah. And I see... The kids coming out of school
are excited they still get to use this, not, "Oh no, do I have to learn this now?" Right?
Exactly. And then from a standpoint of being a truly global language where you're seeing innovation
in Africa, Asia, South America, you know, all over the world. And I think that's exciting.
You know, I'm excited to see what comes next. And I have full confidence the next year in council
will help guide us in the right direction. Yeah, fantastic. Brett.
Yeah, this is a tough one. I feel like I've been around too long. I'm just curious to see how the
community continues to be the community that it is in the face of whatever this pandemic throws at
us in 2022, which is hopefully nothing, but we all know that that may not be. Yeah, we've gone a while
PyCon-less. Yeah, well, and even if this year is a little tricky for, like, as someone from Canada,
right, like, traveling down to the States is not quite as simple. So even if PyCon US is more
or US folk because it's easier for them to travel
and some of us international folk can't make it this year.
It's at least good that we're at least seemingly
going that direction, but I mean,
kudos to the community for keeping things going
and continue to make this community feel welcoming
and open even if it's been fully virtual for everything.
- Yeah, absolutely.
- My hope is we'll just be able to continue to find ways
for the community to do that for itself
and continue to feel welcoming and open and inviting
regardless of the situation and yeah, whatever that brings.
- Yeah.
We'll pull through it, we will.
Pablo?
- I think, I mean, I say a lot of the things
that have been said, but I think my,
I think what the biggest challenges
that we are going to face as a community,
as a language, is that we are,
like we have so many big groups of users
that are using the language that have,
you know, are very passionate,
they have different priorities that now,
it was not true before, but now it's especially not true.
It's not possible to make everyone happy,
and decisions that make some people happy
are directly hurting others.
We have seen this expressed a lot, like, you know, educators don't like big new things
because, you know, it makes more difficult, language is bigger and whatnot.
Well, you know, enterprise Python, let's quote that a lot.
But like, you know, they are pushing for features that make more sense in other scale, although
not exclusive.
So I think it's quite hard because now it's not a matter anymore of like deciding where
the actual good decision is and like, you know, digging for it and picking it and, you
know, ah, this was a good decision.
Not anymore, right?
you need to take decisions that are going to affect a group positively and another group
negatively and that is a quite important position to be into right and it's hard to know because
the community is so diverse in terms of technical and application of the code and stuff yeah
exactly and in action is some some possibility in some cases and maybe we need to be more you know
more more conservative but in some others it's impossible because you know the language needs
to evolve, like the guild work that was mentioned, we cannot say, I mean we could say yeah we are
not going to do it because you know it's going to break a lot and you know everyone is going to be
the C extensions and whatever, I mean language needs to evolve right, like even grammar and you
know implementations and you know community wise and you know it's very hard, it's very hard and
it's impossible to make everyone happy, like it's not difficult, it's important and I think that's
the biggest as a community I will hope that you know more than we make everyone happy we understand
each other and you know we don't we come to a place when when there is some good vibes about
this this problem I think that's going to be the biggest challenge you're giving how big our use
base is. Yeah that is that is important. All right everyone we are definitely out of time thank you
for taking all that's really quickly finish it up with just one of the final questions and we'll
Just super quick, what editor do you use, Barry?
- Emacs, still.
- Thomas?
- Joe.
- Which no one will have heard of.
- I've not heard of.
My brother's name is Joe,
but I'm sure he doesn't help you with that.
- I know Joe.
- Joe is Joe's own editor, and it's from the '80s.
And it has WordStar key bindings,
if you know what WordStar is, which is why I use it.
- Right on.
Carol?
- I have to say, truthfully, Vim, VS Code, PyCharm.
Right. The gamut. Brett, I could predict yours, but go ahead and let us know.
Visual Studio Code.
Right on. Pablo?
Vim.
Okay. Well, I will join Piling in saying thank you for all the work, and it's great to be all
keeping Python going strong.
Thank you, Michael.
Thank you so much.
Thanks for being here.
Thanks, Michael. Thanks, team. Bye.